As I mentioned the next trick will be to get this toe bone to stay parallel to the ground.
When we turn the foot up so we're going to need to add a constraint to this as well.
We press Alt are and let's select the toe bone here.
Let's come up and choose.
Add bone constraint and we'll add a copy rotation constraint once again we'll choose the armature as
the target and for the bone here we're gonna want to choose the TOE ROLL.
So I'm just going to type in toe and we'll choose TOE ROLL dot l.
And it goes crazy.
Take a look at that.
What we need to do is change from world to local space for both of these and also we want to turn off
the NY.
And then instead of choosing invert we actually want to select offset so let's select this.
Now let's give it a try.
I'll select this foot roll BONE AND LET'S TURN IT FORWARD AND THERE WE GO.
WE'VE GOT THE TOE staying on the ground when we roll it forward.
So there we go that's that's really the kind of thing that we want.
We want to be able to roll forward and plant that toe and we want to be able to roll back up onto the
heel.
And as you can see once again there is some weight painting we need to do as we turn this up.
We need this part of the foot to stay flat on the ground and as we rotate back we need this heel edge
right here to stay on the ground as well but we can do that.
We will do that here in just a bit.
Let me press Ault ah and let's do this for the other side.
I'll select the toe.
Let's add a copy rotation constraint.
We'll choose armature and for this will choose TOE ROLL.
AH and we'll change from world to local.
Lastly will choose offset.
And here we go.
That should do it for us.
Or this foot as well.
Yeah.
It's working pretty well.
Okay.
All right.
Ah to clear the rotation for that.
Now the knees.
Well we need to do is create controls for these knees that will allow us to manually point them in the
direction that we want to do that we're going to need to add a new bone here for each of the knees.
So let's go back over into edit mode and I will select one of these knee joints here and let's move
the cursor to here shift as cursor to selected.
Let's create a bone shift a And let's bring this down and get it down to be about the right size that
we want.
So let's say we want it to be about this big here.
Let's also select that bone and duplicate it and put it on the other side as well.
So if I maybe move the cursor over here cursor to selected and I select this bone.
Let's duplicate it with shift D and enter and then let's move it over to the cursor here so shift s
selection to cursor and that'll move it over there.
So let's give these names as well.
This one we should probably call knee control top L and I'll just grab that copy it with control C..
Select that one over there and let's control the.
And change the L to an R.
There we go.
So now we have our two knee control Bones.
I'll take them both now and let's just move them straight out like this.
So we're a little bit out from the character maybe like this and I'm doing them together like this so
they're in the exact same place on each side.
Now what we need to do is have this knee point at these all the time no matter where we move these the
knees should point at them and what we're really going to do is not so much point the knees but we're
going to point the AK chain at these things.
So to do that we need to get back to that inverse.
Semantics constraint panel.
So let's go over to pose mode here and let's select that foot bone.
I mean go to the bone here.
That's foot.
I k there we need to go to that foot dot l bone.
So if we go to our constraints panel here we can see here's that I K panel or that I K constraint.
And in this IKEA constraint panel we have this poll target and that's what that is.
We're gonna target that knee control in this poll target field.
First of all though we need to choose the armature here then for the bone we need to type in knee and
we'll choose that knee control dot l.
There we go.
Now once again it goes crazy but we can take this pole angle and click and drag on and you can see how
we can begin to turn it like this I'm turning it back negative and we wanted to go to negative 90
there we go like that.
So now that knee points at that knee control all the time.
So if we maybe grab this knee control and hit gee look at how that turns along with that object.
All right.
So if we select this foot controlled say and rotate it like this.
Now we want that need to move out and be in line with that.
I can hit G and turn that like this and we can kind of control where that knee is pointing with this
new control here.
All right.
So I'm gonna press Alt are alt G actually a better select everything and I'll press Alt R G.
There we go.
So now let's do that same thing for the other side.
We want to select that foot.
Dot Ah there it is.
I mea make sure in the bone panel here.
There it is.
Put dot R.
Let's go to our constraint panel in the poll target field will choose armature.
And in that Bowen field will choose that knee control right here.
Now control are once again it spins around and is really ugly.
Well let's just type in negative nine to zero and that spins it back around.
And there we go.
We should be able to grab that G and move it back and forth.
Good.
The last thing we should do here is make sure that these knee controls stay with the rig.
So if we took this rig and maybe the put controls down here like this the route and those controls and
hit G and moved it we'd leave our knee controls behind.
I'm going press all g to clear the location.
So let's take these and parent them to a bone in the foot.
We might as well just parent them to the foot controls themselves.
So let's go back into edit mode and we'll select the knee control and then shift click the foot control
and then we'll choose control P and keep offset and we go.
Same thing over here.
Select that foot control control P and keep offset.
So what that means actually now is that when we rotate the foot the knee control will come along and
we can use that foot control to move it away from the direction of the foot.
So let me show you what I mean here if we go to post mode again and I'll select that control when we
turn this now because this is parenthood the knee and the foot will turn in the same direction.
So that just saves an extra step.
Now if we want it to be any different we can take that and move it around like that.
All right.
So I'm going to select everything with the achy old are to clear the rotation of g to clear the location.
And here we go.
So now we pretty much have the rig the way we want it.
Now we need to do is adjust the weights of the feet so that toe and that heel stays on the ground.
And then we need to create control objects that we can use when we animate because we don't want to
actually select the bones here that deform or move the character when we're animating.
We want to select proxy objects control objects and hide the rig away completely because if we accidentally
select the wrong bone and move it or scale it or change it in any way we can destroy the rig.
So we want to keep everything safe and hidden away and just use control objects to animate the character
in the next video.
Let's work on cleaning up the weights for the toe and the heel.